Route53 DNS 

DNS -domain name system
dns is collectkion of rules and records which will helps client to udnerstnad how to reach to a server through urls ! 

in AWS most commonly used 
A: url to ipv4
AAAA: URL to ipv6
Cname: url to URL
alias : url to aws resources 

route53 can use 
public domain names you own or buy 

private domain names the can be resolved by ur instance in ur vpc 

route 53 has advanced features such as loadbalancing 
health checks
routing policy : simple - failover : geolocation ; latency ; weighted ; multi value 

0.53 dollar per month !! 

handson

hostendchedck ! 
registed domain 
restrain constargins purchase the domain name ! 
pending requests 
hosted zoned -- create recoreds ! 
my1strecord valule dns record  serivce nothing ! 

nslookup / dig ! 

EC2 + route53 ! public easy pizzy 

TTL + ec2 time to live 

webbrowser -- DNS -- route 53 -- sendback with TTL 300 s || cache with dns !! 
this nothing but caching of the record ! TTL to expire 
highTTL -24horus less traffic DNS | outdated records
lowTTL - 60s more traffic on DNS recorsds are outdate for less time ! 
TTL - manadatory 


### CNAME VS alias !! 

aws resources (lb,clod) AWS URL - you want it to be myapp.mydomin
CNAME - points to url - url ! 
only for nonrootdomain = aka.smtgn.mydomain.com 
alias = URL TO AWS 
works for both root domain and non root dmoain - aka.mydomain.com 
Free of charge 
natvie healthcheck 

###### recommend using on ALias type !!! 

--------- Simple routing policy
maps a domain to one URL 
A record ! when use need to redirect o asinlge resouce 
u cant attach health check to smile routng policy 
you can add muiltiple values are returened ! 


--- weighted routing policy 

control the percentage of requests that go to specific endpoint 
weight 70:20:10 loads to 70 to ec2 , 20 to ec2 , 10 t o ec2
helpful to test 1 of traffic on new app version of example 
helpful to spirital 
routing polcy weighted !! 70 weight ! 
setID US - create !! 

---- latency routing polcy 

redrict to the server that has the least latency close to us 

user to aws region with leaste latency will be assinged to the user ! 

Healthcheck ----

unhealthy default 3 

after pass health 3 
30s ( can set to 10s interval check )'15 health checkers 
https ,tcp , https --- no ssl verficaiton

health checks can be linked route53 DNS with cloud watch 
Endpoint 
IP address domain name ! 
standard and fast health check || therhosuld to define -- latency grapg !1 

failover - routing policy -- 
primary and secondary failover part ! 

geolocation --- default poklic y no match is found !! 
routing based on user location ! 

